Now for this module, again let's work with a simple program and for this attached you find that starting
code, a zip file with the index.html file and an app.js file. The index.html file is relatively lean,
we got a button in there and that's it,
we got the script import in here. As you can tell by the title, we're going to build our rock paper scissors
game here,
very basic game,
most of the interaction will happen with the help of alerts and prompts and in the console
but we do have that button to start the game and in the app.js file which is getting imported here,
we basically got an empty file, the only thing I added for you is this access to the button which allows
us to add an event listener.
Now speaking of that, we can of course add a function, maybe name it start game, as you learned it with
the function keyword, then the name, the list of parameters,
here I don't need any
and then the function body where you can put your code and then you can call that function like this
and what this would do of course is that if we output game is starting here, just like that and we save
that and we then reload this page, load this page, visits the index.html file, we essentially see the game
is starting output here in the console,
clicking the button here doesn't do anything because we didn't connect this function to the button,
we just execute it like this,
this would be this so-called direct execution which I meant.
Now on the other hand, you can also go to the start game button and add an event listener, click listener
here and point at the start game function,
then you don't add parentheses here,
instead you just give the add event listener function here the name of the function and behind the scenes,
that will do the wire up work and make sure that this function gets called when a click occurs.
Now if we do that, then we actually see there is no output right now but if I click the button, there
it is, this is this indirect execution.
Now the first important thing which I want to highlight here or which I want to dive in is this add
event listener function actually.
This is not a function defined by us,
instead it's in the end provided by the browser but we don't call it like this,
instead we call it on this start game button, which seems to be an object because we use this dot notation.
Now you learned that objects can have properties, you can have something like a person object with a
name property like this and then you can always access person.name to for example output that, right?
So that's a syntax you learned, this is something we know.
Now here we also use the dot notation
but what we then do is we don't access a property, we're not logging it or doing some calculation with
it,
instead we execute it as a function and indeed, functions can be stored inside of objects as well. If
we add our person here and I add a greet property, let's say like a normal property,
thus far nothing special,
then instead of just having a value here on the right, something like Max or a number or even another
object, you can also put a function here,
for example a function greet
and there we could say hello there, this would be a basic function stored in an object.
Now the only special thing here really is that on the right side of our key-value pairs,
so after our colon, we don't have a value which we used thus far to store it in a variable
but instead here we have a function. Now that's of course a different use of function because thus far,
we always created a function standalone,
we're not storing this function anywhere,
we just create it like this and this automatically creates this start game thing which Javascript
registers which we then later can use by its name. Here,
I also do that but then this seems to be stored in here
and indeed if we now execute person.greet and we add parentheses here, we can execute this as a normal
function.
If I save that and reload this page, we see hello there,
so indeed we can store a function in an object and that is then called a method, it's just a term for it, just
as we named a variable in an object, like name, just as we name this a property even though in the end
it's a bit like storing a value in a variable, just without an equal sign
but that's then called a property.
Well if you store a function in such a property, so in a key, in an object, then you call it a method but
a method is nothing else than a function attached to an object
you could say and add event listener therefore is a method on this start game button object
and this is an object generated for us by Javascript by calling this method up here,
the getElementByID method which exists on this document thing. The document thing here by the way
is a globally available variable in the end which gives us access to our HTML document but more on that
in a separate module where we dive into how we can interact with the HTML code,
that's not the focus of this module but this in the end is a method which in the end generates or gives
us this object which we store in start game button,
so an object which represents this button so to say and this in turn then has this add event listener
method which we can call to register an event listener.
So storing functions in objects is possible,
you call them like this and they're then basically methods, you call them methods if they're stored in
objects.
So that's a first important thing,
I'll comment this out now because we don't need it for the game but I wanted to mention it that you
can have functions and objects and they're then called methods.